SECTION A
Use a Pen to Circle the Correct Option (10 marks)
In Ivan Pavlov's experiments, the meat powder
acted as a/an...
A. conditioned stimulus
B. unconditioned response
C. unconditioned stimulus
D. unconditioned stimulus
One of the following theories of play states that
children play because they are unhindered from
the protection of adults or parents and have excess
energy to release
A. Ego-expanding theory
B. Pre-exercise theory
C. Recapitulation theory
D. Surplus energy theory
3. One key difference between sensory memory and
short-term memory is that...
A. the information in sensory memory fades in
one or two seconds, while short-term
memories last several hours.
B. short-term memories can be described, while
sensory memories cannot.
C. the quality and detail of sensory memory are
far superior to those of short-term memory.
D. sensory memory stores auditory information,
while short-term memory stores visual
information.
4. The stage of development that serves as the
difference between childhood and adulthood is
known as...
A. adolescence
B. infancу
C. toddlerhood
D. none of the options
5. Development in Psychology is a term that is used
to describe the...
I- emotional development of the child
II- mental development ofthe child
III- physical development ofthe child
A. I and II only
B. II and III only
C. I and III only
D. I, II and III
6. The principle of human growth and development
that states that human develop through an
unfolding of his or her personalities is called...
7.
8.
Page 1 of 8
A. cephalocaudal
B. epigenetic
C. orthogenetic
D. proximodistal
In normal and healthy humans, each cell normally
contains...... of chromosomes.
A. 11 pairs
B. 23 pairs

In normal and healthy humans, each cell normally
contains...... of chromosomes.
A. 11 pairs
B. 23 pairs
C. 32 pairs
D. 46 pairs
Two closed, pyramid-shaped beakers containing
clearly identical amounts of a liquid are suddenly
judged by a child to hold different amounts after
one of the beakers is inverted. The child
apparently lacks a...
A. capacity for habituation.
B. concept of conservation.
C. secure attachment.
D. sense of object permanence

9. The correct order of the three stages of human
prenatal development are...
A. embryo, zygote, foetus
B. embryonic, placental, umbilical
C. germinal, embryo, foetus
D. germinal, implantation, foetus.
10.Why is language development important in the
early years of a child?
A. It helps the child to develop values
B. It helps the child to solve problems
C. It introduces the child to the academic world
D. It introduces the child to the social world
11. In Pavlov's work dogs salivated naturally in
response to being given meat powder. In this situation, the meat powder is the ...... while the
salivation is the...
A. Conditioned Response, Conditioned Stimulus
B. Conditioned Stimulus, Conditioned Response
C. Unconditioned Response, Unconditioned

15. McKeown sits in his father's car and criticizeshis
father for speeding because according to him,
speeding is against the state's laws. From the
Kohlberg's theory of moral development,
McKeown is at.........stage.
A. conventional
B. early conventional
C. post-conventional
D. pre-conventional
16. According to Lev S. Vygotsky, what does
scaffolding allow children to do?
A. Appreciate social context and learnskills
B. Explore their environment
C. Make friends
D. None of these
17. Giving a student extra homework to reduce
misbehaviours in class is an example of...
A. negative punishment
B. negative reinforcement
C. positive punishment
D. positive reinforce

18.Which situation describes the use of episodic
memory?
A. Belinda verified her identity over the phone
by giving her date of birth.
B. Jim remembered the excitement of the
birthday party his friends had planned for
him.
C. Samir recalled that a Pan Am commercial jet
had crashed over Scotland.
D. Serena asked her teacher to name the capital
of Mozambique.
19. All of the following can be true of socioemotional development during adolescence
except...
A. Adult approval of behaviour becomes less
important to the adolescents
B. Peer approval of behaviour becomes more
important to adolescents

C. Socio-emotional maturity lags behind
physical and intellectual development
D. They are hardly torn between group
conformity and achieving independence
20. In the theory of forgetting...... interference
works backwards, and ............ interference
works forwards.
A. primary, recency
B. proactive, retroactive
C. recency, primacy
D. retroactive, proactive

homsky and Slobin are regarded as
nguage acquisition. Theorists of
Essuman,a primary three teacher was taking pupils through a mathematic lesson. Few minutes
o the lesson, she noticed that the children were worn out.She gave the pupils a ten-minute break allow them play, de-stress and restore their lost energy. Which theory of play explain Ms. suman's actions?
be type of learning in which reinforcement or punishment are used to either increase or decrease
e probability that a behaviour will occur again is known as
he stage of social play where children play with similar objects in similar ways but not together is
own as
r. Mahama did not allow his student, Delight, from participating in play activities during break time,

mply because she was disturbing her colleagues in class. Dr. Mahama sought to decrease the
ecurrence ofthe behaviour demonstrated by Delight. Which type of punishment did Dr. Mahama
se?
laget is to egocentric speech while Vygotsky is to
the prenatal stage, the appearance of a true bone cell ends the
speech.
he domain of human development that is concerned with changes in intellectual abilities,
including attention, memory, academic and everyday knowledge, problem solving, imagination,
reativity, and language is referred to as
Knowledge of the meaning of words which also includes knowledge of related words and the
differences between them is called
mmanuella, a level 200 Psychology student, wanted to retrieve information on factors that affect
prenatal growth (a material she first learnt),but kept remembering information on memory (a material
ahe learnt later). What type of interference caused this forgetting?

13. The process by which information is allowed into the memory system automatically or by
personalized effort is known as
14. Ms. Delight Abla Klutsey loves to cook and thus, she unconsciously and effortlessly recall the
procedure for preparing her preferred delicacy. Which part of the long-term memory is at work?
15. In Ivan Pavlov's principles of classical conditioning, generalization refers to the tendency for stimuli
similar to the to elicit the conditioned response.
16. The biologically based enablers for language development are
17. According to Piaget, the situation that explains the concept by which children babble and often talked
to themselves as they went about their daily activities is known as
18. Adwoa begun throwing tantrums when her mother took her tablet from her so she could avoid
distractions and do her homework. Annoyed at her beh

Dr. Frank is learning French for their upcoming trip to Namibia. However, Dr. Frank previously learned
Swahili in high school. How might proactive interference impact Dr. Frank's ability to learn French, given
their prior knowledge of Swahili? How could Dr. Frank mitigate the effects ofproactive interference in this situation? 